Classification of IVS1-10T-->C as a polymorphism of BRCA1.
Mutations inactivating the tumor suppressor gene BRCA1 may be responsible for disease for up to 80% of familial ovarian cancer cases.
In this syndrome, tumorigenesis classically initiates from an inherited mutation in one allele followed by somatic deletion of the normal allele.
Sequencing of BRCA1 amplified from genomic DNA of lymphocytes and microdissected ovarian tumor cells of a familial ovarian cancer patient revealed three, rare heterozygous DNA variations (2418delA, 233G-->A, and IVS1-10T-->C) in both tumor and constitutional (lymphocyte) DNA.
Thus, both copies of BRCA1 were retained in tumor.
Haplotype analysis of the patient and four siblings assigned 2418delA to one copy of BRCA1 and 233G-->A and IVS1-10T-->C to the other.
The DNA change, 2418delA, is considered a mutation that inactivated one BRCA1 allele because it caused a frameshift and generation of a premature stop codon, resulting in synthesis of a truncated peptide as evidenced by an in vitro protein truncation test.
The DNA variation, 233G-->A, does not result in an amino acid change, and is considered a benign polymorphism.
IVS1-10T-->C is a unique BRCA1 change that occurs in the last nucleotide of a consensus sequence for a branch site critical for RNA splicing.
Therefore, we investigated whether IVS1-10T-->C deleteriously affected BRCA1 splicing or expression, and thereby inactivated the other BRCA1 allele.
Using the technique of reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (PCR) with RNA isolated from lymphoid cell lines of the patient and of controls, no evidence was found that IVS1-10TC abnormally disrupted mRNA splicing or caused the absence of BRCA1 mRNA.
Thus, IVS1-10T-->C is not harmful to BRCA1 function, and is classified a benign polymorphism.
Retention of the normal BRCA1 allele in the tumor with the heterozygous germline BRCA1 mutation, 2418delA, indicated that mutational inactivation of both BRCA1 alleles was not required for tumorigenesis.
It is possible that the normal allele may be functionally inactivated by a nonmutational mechanism.
