Relationship between Rap1 protein phosphorylation and regulation of Ca2+ transport in platelets: a new approach.
Although the interrelationship between the two messengers Ca2+ and cyclic AMP in platelet function is well documented, its mechanism of action still remains to be established.
We investigated here the question of the regulation of platelet Ca(2+)-ATPases by cyclic AMP through the phosphorylation of the Rap1 protein using a pathological model.
We first found experimental conditions where Ca(2+)-transport by platelet membrane vesicles appeared to be dependent on the phosphorylation of the Rap1 protein.
Then, we studied platelets of patients with congestive heart failure for their expression of the potential 97 kDa Ca(2+)-ATPase target of regulation through the Rap1 protein as well as the phosphorylation of the Rap1 protein using the catalytic subunit of the cyclic AMP-dependent protein kinase (C. Sub.).
In the first patients studied, we found no significant modification in the expression of the 97 kDa Ca(2+)-ATPase by Western blotting using the PL/IM 430 monoclonal antibody which specifically recognized this isoform.
In contrast, the Rap1 protein was differentially phosphorylated when using 15 micrograms/ml of the C. Sub.
These results allowed us to use these pathological platelets to study the relationship between the expression of Rap1 protein and the regulation of Ca2+ transport by selecting a patient with severe heart failure.
We could show a decrease in the expression as well as in the phosphorylation of Rap1 protein and demonstrate a lower effect of C. Sub. on Ca2+ transport.
Finally, by studying a further series of patients, we could confirm that the decrease in Rap1 protein expression in heart failure, whatever its extent, was variable, and could strictly correlate the expression of Rap1 protein with the stimulatory effect of C. Sub. on Ca2+ transport.
Besides the evidence for regulation of the expression of the Rap1 protein in platelets from patients with heart failure, these findings constitute a new approach in favour of the regulation of platelet Ca2+ transport through the phosphorylation of the Rap1 protein.
