Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) replicative gene expression in tumour cells of AIDS-related non-Hodgkin's lymphoma in relation to CD4 cell number and antibody titres to EBV.
OBJECTIVE: To determine whether activation of Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) replication in tumour cells of AIDS-related non-Hodgkin's lymphoma (ARNHL) is correlated with CD4+ cell counts and influences antibody response to EBV [anti-Z Epstein-Barr replicative activator (ZEBRA), anti-early antigen (EA), anti-viral capsid antigen (VCA)].
DESIGN: Retrospective study based on immunohistochemistry and in situ hybridization to detect EBV replicative gene products in tissue samples from patients affected by ARNHL and correlation with CD4+ cell counts and results of EBV serology (including anti-ZEBRA activity) in sera from the same patients.
METHODS: Seventeen out of 22 cases of ARNHL were selected for the presence of EBV [Epstein-Barr early region (EBER) RNA-positive].
Immunohistochemistry was performed with anti-ZEBRA, anti-EA-restricted, anti-VCA antibodies and in situ hybridization with BHLF1/NotI oligoprobes on tumour samples.
Results were statistically correlated with those of CD4+ cell counts (17 out of 17) and with anti-EBV antibody titres (13 out of 17) assessed using standard immunofluorescence method and enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay procedure using recombinant ZEBRA protein and synthetic peptides as antigens.
RESULTS: BZLF1 (ZEBRA) or early gene products (EA-R and EA-D/BHLF1/NotI) were detected in a small proportion (< 0.01-5%) of tumour cells in eight of these 17 cases by immunohistochemistry and in situ hybridization.
Demonstration of replicative gene expression did not correlate with either low CD4+ cell counts (P > 0.05) or anti-EBV antibody titres (P > 0.05).
Anti-ZEBRA activity was not significantly increased in patients affected with ARNHL, the cells of which expressed replicative gene products (P > 0.05).
CONCLUSION: The degree of immunodeficiency does not clearly enhance replicative gene expression in tumour cells of ARNHL.
EBV serology, including anti-ZEBRA activity, is not a reliable tool for predicting the occurrence of such proliferations.
