Chlorinated dibenzo-p-dioxins and dibenzofurans and the human immune system.
1.Blood cell receptors in volunteers with moderately increased body burdens.
Using monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) and flow cytometry, we studied a variety of surface receptors on lymphocyte subpopulations of workers with moderately increased body burdens of 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) and of other polychlorinated dibenzo-p-dioxins and dibenzofurans (PCDD/PCDF), expressed here as International-Toxicity Equivalencies (I-TE).
The hypothesis to be tested was whether or not humans exhibit a similar susceptibility to PCDDs/PCDFs with respect to the surface receptors found previously to respond to small doses of 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) in Callithrix jacchus.
These are: helper-inducer (memory) T cells (CD4+CD45R0+CD45RA-CD29highCD11a+), CD20+ B cells, and cytotoxic T cells (CD8+CD56+/CD57+).
Furthermore, 68 triple-labellings with mAbs were performed on the cells of each volunteer to possibly generate further hypotheses.
It was evaluated whether any of the variables might be used as a biomarker of effects for this class of compounds.
There were two main goals: (1) to evaluate whether workers with a moderately increased PCDD/PCDF-body burden [25-140 ppt TCDD or 104-522 ppt I-TE in blood fat] exhibit changes in the surface receptors of white blood cells, as observed in previous studies in non-human primates, and (2) to clarify whether persons at the upper range [10-23 ppt TCDD or 30-90 ppt I-TE in blood fat] of the body burden reference values of a not particularly exposed population show detectable deviations in these immunological variables, when compared with persons at the lower and medium range [1-3 ppt TCDD or 9-29 ppt I-TE] of these body burden reference values.
Regression analysis of our data revealed slight trends for some of the biomarkers (e.g. CD45R0+).
With one exception, these were all increases.
None of the alterations observed are of medical relevance.
The slight increase in the percentage of CD4+CD45R0+ cells remained significant even after covariant analysis taking age-related changes into account.
Altogether, the data do not provide any evidence to support an assumption that moderately increased body burdens of PCDDs/PCDFs in adults induce decreases in the cellular components of the human immune system.
Adult humans certainly are less susceptible to this action of PCDDs/PCDFs than adolescent Callithrix jacchus.
