Transcription factor GATA-1 and erythroid development.
In summary, we derived an experimental system that allows us to dissect the function of GATA-1 in red cell development at a genetic level.
We have established the essential nature of GATA-1 during both primitive and definitive erythropoiesis.
By ablating the expression of the endogenous GATA-1 gene, we are in a position to introduce a variety of constructs that harbor subtle modifications in flanking or protein-coding sequences.
We can now study regulatory regions and functional domains of the protein in the context of a true erythroid environment, experiments that have not been possible heretofore.
Although the assay involves the dramatic loss of red cell production, it should be possible to define important regulatory domains that can then be assayed using less stringent systems, such as cell-free extracts for in vitro transcription.
The ideal situation would be analyses conducted in GATA-1- erythroid cells.
However, these cells have been impossible to generate given the requirement of GATA-1 for Epo receptor expression and red cell viability (C. Simon and S. Orkin, unpublished observations).
It may be possible to produce such cells by first expressing the Epo receptor under the influence of a constitutive promoter and then targeting the GATA-1 gene.
If GATA-1- red cells were available, the analyses would involve the actual transcription of or chromatin structure surrounding the globin genes.
Structure-function studies of the GATA-1 protein could be greatly simplified and a larger number of mutants studied.
However, the ES cell system can be used as an alternative until targeted erythroleukemia cells become available.
Other applications involve the introduction of other GATA-binding protein family members to determine whether they rescue the mutation.
If they cannot, chimeric proteins can be tested to identify which amino acids distinguish the different family members.
We feel that these experiments are vital to understanding the function of GATA-1 during erythroid ontogeny.
How does GATA-1 regulate red cell genes like globin or the Epo receptor?
Once we identify the functional domains of the GATA-binding proteins, we hope to learn what proteins GATA-1 binds to in the basic transcription machinery or in chromatin.
Is GATA-1 necessary for globin gene switching?
GATA-1 may be modified differently during development so that the locus control region can interact with different globin promoters.
We may find that one region of the protein is required for embryonic expression and another for adult globin gene expression.
