Synergy between signal transduction pathways is obligatory for expression of c-fos in B and T cell lines: implication for c-fos control via surface immunoglobulin and T cell antigen receptors.
Expression of the protooncogene c-fos is controlled by three main regulatory pathways involving kinase C, cAMP, and calcium.
Kinase C mediates its effects via phosphorylation of serum response factor (SRF) which interacts with the serum response element (SRE); cAMP and calcium mediate their effects via phosphorylation of CREB (cAMP regulatory element binding protein) presumably by activation of a protein kinase A or calmodulin-regulated kinase.
We have examined the function of these elements in Burkitt's lymphoma cells (Ramos and Daudi) as well as a T lymphocytic cell line (Jurkat).
We have found that stimulation of any one of these pathways alone has little or no effect on c-fos induction.
However, kinase C activation (PMA stimulation) combined with either cAMP (forskolin plus MIX) or calcium stimulation (ionophore) leads to greatly enhanced c-fos induction.
By contrast, cAMP in the presence of calcium shows no synergy in c-fos induction.
Okadaic acid augments PMA- as well as calcium-mediated activation of c-fos, and has little or no effect when combined with cAMP.
The main difference between Ramos (B cells) and Jurkat (T cells) in the regulation of c-fos is that cAMP plus calcium is strongly synergistic in Jurkat and is without effect in Ramos.
Analysis of AP-1 activity using gel mobility shift assays confirms that the requirements for synergy in c-fos mRNA induction are paralleled by requirements for synergy in induction of AP-1 activity.
Signaling in B cells due to anti-Ig stimulation involves both kinase C activation and release of intracellular calcium, and results in c-fos mRNA induction.
Our results indicate that synergy between the kinase C activation and calcium is needed for efficient c-fos induction since neither of these two alone induces c-fos well.
That synergy of signaling pathways is relevant for the anti-Ig induction of c-fos is supported by the fact that cAMP-inducing agents and okadaic acid further enhance anti-Ig induction of c-fos.
These results suggest that cell-specific patterns of synergy are an essential feature for c-fos induction and may be relevant for c-fos control through B and T cell antigen receptors.
