Receptors for interleukin (IL)-10 and IL-6-type cytokines use similar signaling mechanisms for inducing transcription through IL-6 response elements.
The cytoplasmic domain of the receptor for interleukin 10 (IL-10R) contains two box 3 sequence motifs that have been identified in the signal-transducing receptor subunits for IL-6-type cytokines and noted to be required for activating STAT3 and inducing transcription through IL-6-responsive elements.
To determine whether the IL-10R has signaling functions similar to IL-6R in cells normally expressing these receptors, leukocytes of the B-, T-, and NK-cell lineages were treated with either cytokine.
Both cytokines activated factors that bound to the sis-inducible element and included STAT1 and STAT3.
The cell response to IL-10 characteristically differed from that to IL-2/IL-15, IL-4, and interferon gamma.
The signaling capabilities of the IL-10R for activating specific STAT proteins and inducing gene transcription were defined by reconstitution of receptor functions in transfected tissue culture cells.
COS-1 cells, co-expressing the human IL-10R and individual STAT proteins, confirmed a preference of the IL-10R for STAT3 and STAT1.
Unlike many hematopoietin receptors, the IL-10R did not detectably activate STAT5.
The IL-10R, together with reporter gene constructs containing different IL-6-responsive gene elements, reconstituted in hepatoma cells an induction of transcription by IL-10 that was comparable to that by IL-6.
This regulation could not be appreciably modified by enhanced expression of STAT proteins.
The similar actions of IL-10R and IL-6R on the induction of endogenous IL-6-responsive genes were demonstrated in hepatoma cells stably expressing the IL-10R.
These receptor functions required the presence of the box 3 motifs, as shown by the analysis of the mouse IL-10R constructs containing progressively truncated cytoplasmic domains.
The data demonstrate that the IL-10R, unlike other members of the interferon receptor family, is highly effective in recruiting the signaling pathways of IL-6-type cytokine receptors.
