Interstitial deletion constitutes the major mechanism for loss of heterozygosity on chromosome 20q in polycythemia vera.
An acquired deletion of the long arm of chromosome 20 is a recurrent abnormality in myeloproliferative disorders, particularly polycythemia vera and myelodysplastic syndromes.
The association of 20q deletions with myeloid "stem cell" disorders suggests that the deletions mark the site of one or more genes, loss or inactivation of which plays a role in the regulation of normal hematopoietic progenitors.
We have recently performed a detailed molecular analysis of 20q deletions in peripheral blood (PB) granulocytes and defined a commonly deleted region of 16 to 21 centimorgan (cM).
To further reduce the size of the common deleted region we have searched for small deletions or mitotic recombination events, neither of which would be detected by conventional cytogenetics.
We have studied 48 patients with polycythemia vera and four patients with idiopathic myelofibrosis.
In each case, cytogenetic analysis had either failed or had shown no abnormalities of chromosome 20.
Seventeen microsatellite markers that span the common deleted region were used to search for loss of heterozygosity in granulocyte DNA.
No instance of microsatellite instability was observed in a total of 880 comparisons of granulocyte and T-cell DNA.
Granulocyte DNA from four patients exhibited allele loss on 20q.
In each case the allele loss was caused by an interstitial deletion because heterozygosity at distal markers was retained and because quantitative Southern blotting demonstrated hemizygosity.
Loss of heterozygosity in PB granulocytes would be masked by the presence of significant numbers of normal granulocytes not derived from the malignant clone.
Therefore, the human androgen receptor assay (HUMARA) was used to determine granulocyte clonality.
In 21 of 27 informative female patients the majority of the granulocytes were clonally derived.
In 5 patients the granulocytes appeared polyclonal and in 1 patient unilateral X inactivation was observed in both granulocytes and T cells.
These results show that, in the vast majority of patients presented here, the failure to detect loss of heterozygosity cannot be attributed to the presence of normal polyclonal granulocytes.
Our results therefore show that allele loss on chromosome 20q in polycythemia vera does not commonly involve mitotic recombination or chromosome loss and that microsatellite instability is a rare event in this disorder.
