Characterization of cytokine differential induction of STAT complexes in primary human T and NK cells.
Cytokines, IL-2, IL-4, IL-6, IL-7, IL-12, and IL-15 are key regulators of human peripheral blood T and NK cell activation and differentiation but the precise mechanisms that give rise to their differential activities within these cells are not clear.
Recent studies reveal that a family of transcription factors, signal transducers and activators of transcription (STATs) directly mediate many cytokine signals.
We analyzed the activation of STATs in primary human T and NK cells by a variety of specific cytokines.
We demonstrate that IL-12 induces STAT4 only in freshly isolated primary NK cells, but not in primary T cells, consistent with the lack of the IL-12 receptor in resting T cells.
In contrast, IL-4 induces different C epsilon GAS DNA-protein binding complexes in both T and NK cells.
Moreover, IL-4 costimulation with IL-2 or IL-12 does not alter their own preferential GAS-like DNA binding patterns when C epsilon-, Fc gamma RI-, and SIE GAS motif containing oligonucleotide probes are compared, suggesting that induction of GAS-like DNA-protein binding complexes by IL-2, IL-4, and IL-12 is highly selective and represents one important factor in determining specific gene activation.
In addition, IL-6 and IL-2 synergistically induce homo- and heterodimerized STAT1 alpha and STAT3 in both NK and T cells, consistent with their reported synergism in modulating perforin gene expression.
We further demonstrated that IL-2, -7, and -15 induce multiple STAT proteins, including STAT5a, STAT5b, STAT1 alpha, STAT3, and another unidentified Fc gamma RI GAS DNA-binding protein.
Finally, we observed that activated STAT5a and STAT5b proteins form distinct Fc gamma RI GAS binding patterns in T and NK cells, suggesting that they might have different roles in gene regulation.
Our data provide evidence that the differential responses in gene expression and cell activation seen in primary NK and T cells on direct stimulation with different cytokines may be a direct result of distinct activation of STAT transcription factors.
