Interleukin-4 and -13 induce upregulation of the murine macrophage 12/15-lipoxygenase activity: evidence for the involvement of transcription factor STAT6.
When human monocytes or alveolar macrophages are cultured in the presence of interleukin (IL)-4 or IL-13, the expression of the reticulocyte-type 15-lipoxygenase is induced.
In mice a 15-lipoxygenase is not expressed, but a leukocyte-type 12-lipoxygenase is present in peritoneal macrophages.
To investigate whether both lipoxygenase isoforms exhibit a similar regulatory response toward cytokine stimulation, we studied the regulation of the leukocyte-type 12-lipoxygenase of murine peritoneal macrophages by interleukins and found that the activity of this enzyme is upregulated in a dose-dependent manner when the cells were cultured in the presence of the IL-4 or IL-13 but not by IL-10.
When peripheral murine monocytes that do not express the lipoxygenase were treated with IL-4 expression of 12/15-lipoxygenase mRNA was induced, suggesting pretranslational control mechanisms.
In contrast, no upregulation of the lipoxygenase activity was observed when the macrophages were prepared from homozygous STAT6-deficient mice.
Peritoneal macrophages of transgenic mice that systemically overexpress IL-4 exhibited a threefold to fourfold higher 12-lipoxygenase activity than cells prepared from control animals.
A similar upregulation of 12-lipoxygenase activity was detected in heart, spleen, and lung of the transgenic animals.
Moreover, a strong induction of the enzyme was observed in red cells during experimental anemia in mice.
The data presented here indicate that (1) the 12-lipoxygenase activity of murine macrophages is upregulated in vitro and in vivo by IL-4 and/or IL-13, (2) this upregulation requires expression of the transcription factor STAT6, and (3) the constitutive expression of the enzyme appears to be STAT6 independent.
The cytokine-dependent upregulation of the murine macrophage 12-lipoxygenase and its induction during experimental anemia suggests its close relatedness with the human reticulocyte-type 15-lipoxygenase despite their differences in the positional specificity of arachidonic acid oxygenation.
