Analysis of cytokine signaling in patients with extrinsic asthma and hyperimmunoglobulin E.
BACKGROUND: Recent data suggest that the regulation of class switching to IgE by cytokines is mediated by STAT transcription factors.
The induction of IgE by IL-4 and IL-13 occurs through the activation of the intracellular signal-transducing protein Stat6, whereas the inhibition of IgE class switching by interferon-y (IFN-gamma) occurs through the activation of Statl.
OBJECTIVE: We hypothesized that in extrinsic asthma or in cases of markedly elevated IgE (ie, hyperimmunoglobulin E [HIE]) increased levels of IgE may be associated with alterations in the cytokine levels or the activation of Stat6.
METHODS: PBMCs and sera from 8 patients with extrinsic asthma (mean IgE, 285+/-100 IU/mL), 3 patients with HIE (mean IgE, 7050+/-1122 IU/mL), and 14 nonatopic control subjects (mean IgE, 112+/-28 IU/mL) were analyzed.
RESULTS: The mean IL-4 level detected by ELISA was much greater in patients with HIE than control subjects (88.6+/-11.5 pg/mL vs 11.5+/-7.1 pg/mL, P = .005), and increased IL-4 levels among patients with both asthma and HIE correlated with the increased IgE levels.
In contrast, IL-13 levels were not elevated.
Levels of Stat6 protein present in PBMCs did not differ in the patients and control subjects.
Examination of Stat6 DNA-binding activity demonstrated no activation of IL-4 signaling in patients with either HIE or acute asthma.
Interestingly, evidence for the presence of B cells that have already switched to IgE was seen in PBMCs of several patients with asthma or HIE.
CONCLUSION: These results indicate that (1) IgE production in asthma and HIE usually is associated with elevated levels of IL-4, but not IL-13, in the peripheral blood; (2) the increased sera IL-4 levels in asthma and HIE are not sufficient to induce Stat6 activation in PBMCs; and (3) evidence of switch recombination to epsilon may be detected in isolated cases of elevated IgE.
This implies that high levels of IgE in these patients either results from B cells that have already undergone class switching, from Ig class switching that is localized to target tissues, or both.
