Identification of transcription factors expressed during ATRA-induced neutrophil differentiation of HL60 cells.
A recent clinical therapeutic initiative has been the use of chemical agents which induce the leukaemic cells to overcome their block in differentiation.
In order to understand this block the cascade of molecular events needs to be characterized.
Haemopoietic differentiation is ultimately controlled at the level of gene transcription which is mediated by an array of transcription factors.
Many transcription factors contain similar structural protein sequences, and we have used an RT-PCR-based approach to isolate sequences, from transcription factor gene families which share similar domains.
Degenerate primers corresponding to the TFIIIA zinc-finger consensus amino acid sequences and to the POU-homeodomain and POU-specific domain were used to amplify genes on the basis that they contained similarities in structural motifs shared within these families of transcription factors.
A serum-independent HL60 cell line was induced towards the neutrophil lineage by treatment with all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA) for 24 h.
CD38+ cells committed towards this lineage were enriched and a population of these cells treated with dihydroxyvitamin D3 to induce neutrophil maturation.
RNA extracted from uninduced, ATRA-induced CD38+ cells, and vitamin D3 treated maturing cell cultures were amplified using the degenerate primers.
PCR fragments were cloned, sequenced, clustered into homologous groups, and the group sequences searched on the GenBank database.
The Oct 1 transcription factor, and a very close homologue, KIAA0144, was identified using the POU family primers.
The zinc-finger primers identified three zinc-finger genes.
The pattern of gene expression was suggested from the number of clones in each group at neutrophil commitment and maturation.
The differential expression of the genes in the zinc finger and POU families will lead to a better understanding of the cascade of gene expression which occurs following ATRA-induced differentiation.
