Detection of the chromosome 16 CBF beta-MYH11 fusion transcript in myelomonocytic leukemias.
Karyotypic detection of chromosomal 16 abnormalities classically associated with AML M4Eo can be difficult.
Characterization of the two genes involved in the inv(16)(p13q22), CBF beta and MYH11, has allowed the detection of fusion transcripts by reverse-transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR).
We have analyzed CBF beta-MYH11 fusion transcripts by RT-PCR in myelomonocytic leukemias, with or without eosinophilia, to determine whether their presence correlates with morphology.
Fifty-three cases (11 AML M4Eo; 1 AML M4 with atypical abnormal eosinophils (AML M4 "Eo"); 29 AML M4; 8 AML M5; 3 CMML; and 1 AML M2 with eosinophilia) were analyzed.
All 11 typical AML M4Eo were CBF beta-MYH11 positive.
The single case of AML M4 with distinctive eosinophil abnormalities was negative by karyotype, RT-PCR and fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH).
Three of 29 (10%) AML M4 without abnormal eosinophils were CBF beta-MYH11 positive, 1 of which did not show any apparent chromosome 16 abnormalities by classical metaphase analysis (2 not tested).
Both cases tested also showed MYH11 genomic rearrangement.
None of the other leukemias were RT-PCR positive.
Follow-up of three patient showed residual positivity in apparent complete remission.
These data show that CBF beta-MYH11 fusion transcripts occur not only in the vast majority of typical AML M4Eo, but also in approximately 10% of AML M4 without eosinophilic abnormalities, a much higher incidence than the sporadic reports of chromosome 16 abnormalities in AML M4 would suggest.
Taken together with the detection of CBF beta-MYH11 transcripts in the absence of apparent chromosome 16 abnormalities by classical banding techniques, these data show that additional screening by either RT-PCR or FISH should be performed in all AML M4, regardless of morphologic features, to allow accurate evaluation of the prognostic importance of this fusion transcript.
