Positive and negative regulation of the composite octamer motif of the interleukin 2 enhancer by AP-1, Oct-2, and retinoic acid receptor.
The differentiating agent retinoic acid (RA) has been previously reported to interfere with 12-O-tetradecanoyl-phorbol-13-acetate (TPA)/Ca(2+)-induced signals for the regulation of the -96 to -66-bp octamer motif found in the enhancer for the interleukin (IL)-2 gene, which encodes a major T lymphocyte growth factor.
The IL-2 octamer motif is a composite cis-element which binds Oct-1 and Oct-2 as well as a TPA/Ca(2+)-inducible nuclear factor, previously termed octamer-associated protein (OAP40).
We show here that Oct-2, despite the presence of an active transcriptional activation domain, requires TPA/Ca(2+)-induced signals to strongly transactivate the IL-2 octamer motif in Jurkat T cells.
This Oct-2-dependent transactivation is inhibited by RA.
The presence of an intact COOH-terminal domain of Oct-2 contributes to both TPA/Ca(2+)-induced transactivation and the RA-mediated repression.
We also show that both Fos and Jun components of the AP-1 factors participate in the OAP40 complex.
Furthermore, transfected c-jun, jun-B, jun-D, c-fos, or Fos-B expression vectors partially substitute for TPA and Ca2+ and cooperate with Oct-2 for the transactivation of the combined OAP/octamer cis-element.
Mutations of the genuine octamer-binding site abrogate both the binding of Oct-1 and Oct-2 and the TPA/Ca(2+)-induced transactivation of the OAP/octamer motif.
OAP confers to Oct-2 responsivity to both TPA/Ca2+ and RA, since specific mutations of the AP-1/OAP-binding site significantly reduce the transactivation by Oct-2 in response to TPA and Ca2+ and abolish the inhibition by RA.
Furthermore, retinoic acid receptor (RAR) alpha is able to inhibit in vitro the formation of the complex between the nuclear AP-1/OAP and its specific binding site, resulting in the interference with Oct-2-dependent cis-regulatory function of this AP-1 element.
Therefore, we propose that the TPA/calcium-activated AP-1/OAP element is the main target of positive or negative regulatory signals influencing the IL-2 octamer motif, through synergism with Oct-2 and antagonism by RAR.
