The myeloid-cell-specific c-fes promoter is regulated by Sp1, PU.1, and a novel transcription factor.
The protein product of the c-fps/fes (c-fes) proto-oncogene has been implicated in the normal development of myeloid cells (macrophages and neutrophils).
mRNA for c-fes has been detected exclusively in myeloid cells and vascular endothelial cells in adult mammals.
Although a 13-kilobase-pair (kb) human c-fes transgene exhibits high levels of expression in mice, the sequences that confer myeloid-cell-specific expression of the human c-fes gene have not been defined.
Transient-transfection experiments demonstrated that plasmids containing 446 bp of c-fes 5'-flanking sequences linked to a luciferase reporter gene were active exclusively in myeloid cells.
No other DNA element within the 13-kb human c-fes locus contained positive cis-acting elements, with the exception of a weakly active region within the 3'-flanking sequences.
DNase I footprinting assays revealed four distinct sites that bind myeloid nuclear proteins (-408 to -386, -293 to -254, -76 to -65, and -34 to +3).
However, the first two footprints resided in sequences that were largely dispensable for transient activity.
Plasmids containing 151 bp of 5'-flanking sequences confer myeloid-cell-specific gene expression.
Electrophoretic mobility shift analyses demonstrated that the 151-bp region contains nuclear protein binding sites for Sp1, PU.1, and/or Elf-1, and a novel factor.
This unidentified factor binds immediately 3' of the PU.1/Elf-1 sites and appears to be myeloid cell specific.
Mutation of the PU.1/Elf-1 site or the 3' site (FP4-3') within the context of the c-fes promoter resulted in substantially reduced activity in transient transfections.
Furthermore, transient-cotransfection assay demonstrated that PU.1 (and not Elf-1) can transactivate the c-fes promoter in nonmyeloid cell lines.
We conclude that the human c-fes gene contains a strong myeloid-cell-specific promoter that is regulated by Sp1, PU.1, and a novel transcription factor.
